Okay, you've written some other fantasy which we'll talk about, but the thing
we'll want to talk about first, which is probably what we'll make the main
programs on, is the fuzzy stuff. Is that appropriate? Could you give us some
background about that? I know H. Beam Piper wrote about the fuzzies first of
all, and how is it that other people are now writing about it, that sort of
thing? What's the flow of how that worked, and then how did you get interested
in writing fuzzy material? Well, Mr. Piper died in 1966. A suicide, which was a
very tragic thing. And he left a considerable literary estate. He had been
writing rather successfully for a long time. There was sort of a hiatus there
for a number of years until one of his friends, I believe it was Jerry Pournelle,
but I'm not certain, persuaded Ace to purchase his literary estate. All the
rights and all of his books and short stories and everything, which they did,
and they reissued Little Fuzzy and Fuzzy Sapiens in a single volume under the
fuzzy papers, and it was very successful. It had a built-in market of people who
remembered the books, And so they decided that they wanted another book. So they
turned to Mr. William Tuning, who wrote a third book, Fuzzy Bones, which I
enjoyed very much. I based a great deal of the background of my book on the
substructure that he had created for their historical background. And, uh, then,
I believe it was Susan Allison, who was then the head science fiction editor at
Ace, decided that they wanted a book from the viewpoint of the Little Aliens.
Well, my, uh,
editor, uh, had just bought paperback rights to my first two double-day books,
And she was in the process of putting them into production for Ace. And she'd
had a great deal of back-and-forth conversation with my agent, who is still
blackstaggered at how fast I am. And so, one day the phone rang, that dear
phone. It was Susan Allison. She said, Would you be interested in writing a book
to continue H. Beam Piper's Fuzzy series? Are you familiar with mine? I said,
Yes, I've got my teeth on them. And she said, well, would you be interested? We
want one from the viewpoint of the aliens. And she said, I shouldn't say this,
but we were kicking it around the office and trying to figure who was extremely
fast and partly alien, and naturally we thought of you. Well, I was flattered,
you know, because I am both.
So, I said, well, I'll tell you what. I will reread the books. And then I will
write whatever feels comfortable. So that I know how well I fit into a fuzzy
skin. And you will be able to tell how well you like what I do. And then we'll
go from there. So, this was nearly February. So, I sat down. And it's a very
funny thing. Becoming an alien. is not all that difficult, but you have to have
been a very peculiar child to be able to do it well. So I remembered when I was
two feet tall. I can remember back before I was two years old. I remembered how
the world, the world is full of shoes and kneecaps, you know. Everything is
tremendous. Shrubs are trees, and trees are just something up there like clouds,
you know. So I shrunk myself down to two feet tall and put myself on a world
where everything thought I was delicious and went from there because the
treatment of the fuzzies in both Piper and Cunning books is rather peripheral to
the human story and the fuzzies are given rather short shrift as sort of cutesy
poo creatures. Okay. Mr. Tuning had set up that they had survived on this
totally inimical planet for 1,200 years. So little helpless, big-eyed cutesy
poos don't survive for 1,200 years. You've got to have pretty, bright, gritty
little cats or they're not going to make it. Well, I had some awfully neat
questions to answer that had been set up in the other books and had never been
addressed in those books. Why did they speak in ultrasonics? Why, being
obviously rational creatures capable of great affection, were they sexually
promiscuous? Oh, oh, there were there any number of questions that I had to
answer. And it was so funny because as I went I Just turn okay. This is what
they are and I turn around and look on this is obviously the reason they were
that way they were sexually promiscuous for instance because When their
spaceship crashed a Compliment of only some 400 were aboard and And some half of
those were subsequently killed in an earthquake. So you had a gene pool shared
among something around 150 or 200 individuals. You had to spread your genetic
heritage around. And so this would be a natural outgrowth of assigned breeding
as long as they were in the original valley. and then when they went out, they
retained this imperative from their leaders, you must do this for racial
survival. There were any number of things like that. Anyhow, they loved what I
did. I loved what I did. I wrote that book, 100,000 words in six weeks. I sat on
a wicker stool, which is now permanently imprinted on my derriere.
my husband would come in he would have left me sitting on the stool that morning
he'd come in that evening and say you haven't eaten have you say eaten what's
eating but uh it was a lot of fun of course it took them six months to produce
my contract but it took them to get the money too much longer much longer are
there going to be more coming from you? I really don't know in the middle of all
this one one of the hitches with the contracts was the fact that Berkley bought
Ace and this queered all sorts of deals they had projected a hundred thousand
printing with a $50,000 ad campaign behind it. Well, there had been a couple of
good full-page ads, one in Locust, one in Publishers Weekly, a few around
different places. They gave it a better start than it would have had. But then
when the title passed to Berkeley, they cut the printing to $55,000. They sawed
off the ad campaign right in its tracks. And now they are saying the book has
It's only been out since October you understand. It was on the Locust Trade
Paperback Bestseller list for two months in succession. But when I asked my
editor up there if they would be interested in a proposal for another, she said
well I would, but the powers that be are making. Well this hasn't done very
well, no, she said they don't care that it's their fault that it hasn't sold
millions. They didn't print enough in the first place. And she said we're just
going to have to wait and see how the mass market edition does, and that will be
out in September. So just keep your fingers crossed that the mass market. I just
wouldn't mind at all writing another one. Would you rather enjoy the... I did.
They're nice little people. They really are. They're fun. Yeah. The cover is one
of the better covers. I think they're gorgeous. Gorgeous. Did you have any input
on that, or were you just pleasantly surprised? no but I knew it was going to be
beautiful because Mike Whalen had done the covers for the Piper books and for
the Tuning Book and so I knew what he could do it was funny when the A,C Trade
Catalog came out last fall Golden Dream was the lead book had a double page
color spread but this had been such a hurry-up project that Mike had not yet
completed the cover painting and they had to fake the cover painting, use the
back off one of the old books for it, which is sort of funny. If I remember
right, this is just a trivia thing, but I think when they put out the fuzzy
papers, they had a man kneeling down with a gun and some fuzzy, that was H. Beam
Piper as I understand it. Yeah, I think it was supposed to be. That's what he
looks like, or looked like. And I was always struck by that. I always had the
feeling that H. Beam Piper modeled Jack Holloway, who was the discoverer of the
Fuzzies on himself. It just felt that way.
Okay, let's talk about what else you've done. If you could give us titles and
kind of what genre and what your literary aim is when you're writing them. okay
well let me give you titles first because that's sort of a long project by
itself all right okay in 1979 Double Day published How the Gods Wove in Kyrannon
better spell that K-Y-R-A-N-N-O-N Somebody said your rule is I take it that
there must be one unpronounceable word in every title And I hadn't realized that
So I'm trying to do better In 80 Doubleday brought out The Seekers of Sharnuhn
Which is S-H-A-R-N-U-H-N
81 brought Soul singer Of Tyrnos From Athenium
82 Busted loose Like a pot of popcorn Warlock's Gift came from Doubleday in the
spring.
Paperback reprints from Ace of How the Gods, Wolven, Seekers of Sharnan came out
that spring.
Runes of the Lyre came out from Athenaeum that fall. And Golden, L-Y-R-E. And
Golden Dream, A Fuzzy Odyssey came out that fall. So it sort of just grabbed you
up like a tornado and carried you away spinning.
I write a great many other things besides science fiction and fantasy. I read
eclectically and always have. I've written westerns. I have two westerns out to
market and two more in various stages of disarray which I will finish if and
when I sell the first two. I have written an occult horror novel. I have written
a very strange suspense novel. I have written a peculiar little novel about a
child who visualized an imaginary pet and thereby created a tulpa, which is
something that is not too well known in the west. It's a Tibetan, actually it's
a mental exercise in which you visualize something so concretely that other
people can see it. According to my sources, an English woman in the middle of
the 1800s created a tulpa that traveled with her, and innkeepers would serve it
meals even though it couldn't eat them. But tulpa have a very strange
quirk, they tend to get nastier and nastier. I mean, you can just visualize them
as sweet as all get out. But somewhere down the line, if they stick around, they
get nasty and you have to unmake them. But of course, this was a small child.
She was six years old and she didn't do it according to the rules because she
was psychically talented and she just did it. And when Wilby got nasty, she
couldn't unmake it, and it takes her up to the point at which she's 26 years old
and is suddenly and violently motivated almost on a totally primitive level to
unmake Wilbie, which she did. He attacked her mother, and this is a fun book
that I haven't been able to get my agent to send out. For some reason, will be
bothers her and she never had sent it out to an editor and I just keep champing
at my bits and gnawing on my stubby fingernails. But oh crazy! I just finished a
book in which I combined an Onondaga warrior woman and dream magician with a
14th century adept who has set a trans-dimensional trap in the Iroquois forest
for his own purposes. And he pulls her across into a slightly time and space
different but analogous England. And that was a lot of fun. I'm a language
freak. I learned a lot of onondega. It doesn't have to be language. It's that
anybody understands you understand. But Two Moons and the Black Tower was that
one. I sent it off to my agent, and I called her, and I said, it's on its way. I
don't know if it's saleable, but even if not, it has been worth every minute of
it. I had just had a ball riding it. That's the reason I do it, You know, it's
so much fun. And I never know when I start a book what's going to happen any
more than you do. Do you know at least what genre it's going to be? Not always.
Now, when I do a Western, I mean, you have to put yourself in a Western mood to
do a Western. I get more bloodthirsty when I'm doing a Western.
But sometimes, well, when my agent called me and said, look, if you write
another fantasy I can sell it, and if I'm particularly hungry that day, then
I'll sit down and start a fantasy. But ordinarily I just sort of let them go
with the flow and see what comes out. You've written
westerns, science fiction, fantasy, an occult novel uh do you uh are you writing
let's say fantasy and science fiction now because it sells better or do you just
write what you damn well please i love it i love it i've always loved it ever
since i was a girl hit my first one when i was 15 and never have looked back did
you grow up in a small town farm atmosphere i grew up on a farm uh near
nacogdoches and uh nacogdoches at that time was somewhere around 5000 had the
world's worst paperback distributor and one day on the newsstand popped up A.
Merritt's face in the abyss and I had a quarter in my pocket which was not
always the case back then kids were even poorer than grown people glommed on to
it with cries of joy, took it home, and read it with rockets going off in my
head. Wow, this is mine. I can read it as many times as I want to. And nothing
hit the stands that I didn't manage by hook or by crook or chicken money or
something to get from there on. But of course, I read everything else all along.
I read a lot of archaeology. I read a lot of mythology. and psychiatry and
psychology and Anthropology and oh everything you think of I Love history. I
love obscure history I like neat things like Louis Spence's The History of
Atlantis I thought about forming a club of of the people who have read the
history of Atlantis. I found five so far. It sort of sorts out the sheep from
the goats, you know, in an unusual sort of way. When you were growing up, you
grew up on a farm. Mm-hmm. Were you a dreamer? I mean, I realize you had to work
hard too, but were you kind of a dreamer while you were working, thinking about
it? Oh, it's the best thing. I was a poet, of course, when I was on the farm,
and we were dirt farmers to start with. Biggest old mule you ever saw taught me
how to plow. Mules are the brightest people you will ever meet. They have very
few distractions. and when I was 12, my dad started selling milk, grade C milk,
which meant I came in from school every evening and scrubbed milk cans that had
sat out by the side of the road full of milk until the truck came, had been
taken to Houston, emptied, not rinsed out, and brought back to be left on the
side of the road the next day. That's going to be deducted from my time in Hades
if there's any justice at all. And then when I was 17, we built a dairy barn.
And I mean we built a dairy barn with our own hands. And went into the grade A
dairy business. And a McCormick Daring double unit milker works in perfect IMs.
I wrote 250 sonnets.
I do my best thinking when my hands are busy. And I would milk and get stepped
on and kicked and have cow tails stuck in my mouth. And I'd go right on writing
sonnets in my head, you know. You have to be strange, you understand? It's
necessary. Besides which, you know, I can't think of anything better to take
your mind off shoveling cow manure than writing sonnets. It's just about as far
as you can take your head from what your hands are doing. This morning you were
talking to us about the fact that you think that having written poetry really
helped with your prose in your novels. So would you recount that for the tape?
Oh yes, this is something that I tell people. I talk to a lot of college
classes, and I belong to a group that has beginners in it, and I tell them,
write poetry, even if it's bad poetry, because in poetry you don't have a
novel's worth of elbow room. You can't use 25 wrong words to get across an idea
that two perfect words will give with punch, you know, with real impact.
poetry takes the laziness out of it. It makes you search for the proper word,
the proper phrase, the exact construction that conveys what you want to give.
This is something sort of strange too. I never went to college. I got out of
high school and oh I thought my English teacher was just going to die and
dissolve because I wouldn't go to college I had a I think 99 average for all my
entire senior year which was really not fair because I didn't work at it and
some of the guys who really worked should have gotten better grades than I
didn't but anyhow she said you're not going after the dairy and stay there and I
said well I'm going out to the dairy whether or not I stay there it just depends
on what comes up the pipe but I'm going to go out there and I'm going to do what
I like to do and think what I like to think and learn what I like to learn and
I'm not going to be programmed by some cotton-picking professor I was a very
opinionated 17 year old and so I did and I studied over the next 10 years I
learned first of all I learned self-discipline which is the most important thing
a writer can learn then I studied six languages I learned to read six languages
all sorts of ologies everything you can think of philosophy philology
archaeology anthropology just everything I could get my hands on and while I
made $30 a month it didn't cost me anything to live so I spent thirty dollars a
month on books and you could buy a whale of a lot of books back in 1947 for
thirty dollars and we subscribed my mother always had magazines coming all kinds
of magazines from Atlantic Monthly to Cosmopolitan which at that time was a
literate magazine and so we had a great deal of input And then of course my
parents were both college educated. They were both people with the guts to give
up a good job and throw their hats over the windmill and go out and just make it
or break it on a dirt farm. Which is neat though that nearly killed them when I
did the same thing, somehow the perspectives changed between 30 and 50. But I
got a fantastic education. I admit there were holes in it. I never had too much
grounding in mathematics, though I like mathematics, or lab sciences. In fact, I
never took biology because that year they offered Latin for the first time. And
I was going to have Latin or die. And so I didn't get biology. But really,
that's a lot of fun because now I'm researching recombinant DNA in plant
alteration, and it's just new worlds. It's like fantasy itself, you know, so I'm
having a wonderful time with it. I know you live on a farm now. Could you kind
of go through a typical day, let's not say one where you're writing a fuzzy book
So you're sitting here all day. But what's a typical day for you? How do you
work in the riding? Well, my husband and I get up at 6. He has to go to town and
open up his service station. So I get up and fix breakfast for him at 6. And at
8.15 comes the postman. So I'm standing there. I'm washing dishes or I'm out
there milking the cow. And I'm listening for the postman. You know when Snoopy
is a vulture, when he's on top of his doghouse being a vulture, that's the way I
am with the postman.
I milk one of the cows and turn the five calves in on her and her partner and
feed the goats and feed the cats and feed the dogs. Then I get the mail and look
through. I get such interesting mail. a lot of days I begin my real work of
course in among this I usually try to sweep the porch and straighten the stacks
I've discovered you don't have to clean your living room if you keep your stacks
straight so I straighten the stacks then I hit the typewriter about 9 o'clock
usually and I may answer six letters before I start writing but then I will
usually write depending on what I am engaged in from three to seven hours. I can
write a pretty fair-sized short story in two and a half, three hours, but if I'm
working on a book and it's really hot, well I'll go right on through till 3.30
or 4 o'clock sometime. And I'm one of these lucky people I don't have to eat, I
don't need to eat, so I don't get hungry. I don't have to interrupt myself and
about 3 30 or 4 though the goat starts yelling at the pen I don't know why she
yells at 4 o'clock but she usually does and that wakes me up and I think you
know I don't know whether I can get my old bones up from here or not I'd better
try and see you know it among much creaking and groaning and And I hoished
myself off the stool and straightened out and uncrinked the back. And so that's
then when I go out and, oh, I may dig in my garden. Or take a walk up our little
road. I walk in the woods when it's not deer season. And I have not much
ambition to wind up as a head on somebody's wall. But we have a pretty nice
woods up from us. So I may take a walk and get the kinks out of my bones. And by
the time I get back, it's time to lick the cat all over again and milk the cows
and put the calves on, feed the goats and all that good stuff. And then it's
time to cook supper for Papa, and he gets home about 6.30. And so we pretty well
are ready to pack it in then. We sit there very quietly and trade tidbits about
our days. We usually turn on the television, but it's just for... We're used to
having children around. My husband had two children when we married, and when
the last one left, it just got so quiet. So we need some background noise.
Sometimes we watch, and sometimes we don't, but it's... Oh, it would bore young
people to death, our lifestyle would but we've been places and we've done things
and we've thrown our hats over the windmill two or three times so we're pretty
well ready to sit down and let our bones ache in peace um this is really kind of
a dirty question i guess would you like to be in a situation you're in some
urban environment you don't have to milk the cows on you can just sit there and
right on there do you think this this is an integral part of you i am a peasant
to my toenails uh i am not happy i have lived in town periodically and have been
miserable every minute oh i had to live in houston for 16 months i thought i'd
die in fact i think i would have died if we hadn't left uh we've always had a
little plot of ground maybe not but two acres but something we've always had
some kind of livestock if when spring comes if I can't get my hands in the dirt
and make a garden you just better buy a straight jacket and call them in in the
white coats because I'm ready to go off I do my best writing thinking in the
garden or even milking the cow you know the old head just keeps rolling right
along do you have any questions no wow i think we got approval covered here
the i guess i should ask just so when we write uh the the the introduction of
the the other books that you've written are are by large fantasy by large
fantasy Or by and large fantasy, yes. Romanic fantasy, adventure fantasy, how
would you? It is really more toward heroic fantasy. Though not in the sword and
sorcery type of thing. More people who are heroic, not through physical strength
or anything like that, but because of the press of circumstance and integrity. I
try to write about the way people can be and often are. Realism is fine. I mean,
there's a place for that. But I have never seen that the cause of human
enlightenment has been forwarded too much by depicting the absolute worst
aspects of human nature. People can be noble. They can be courageous. and they
very often are, so why not write about it?
When you do research, you're talking about doing, thinking about recombinant DNA
and all the ologies that you're interested in. Do you, by and large, depend on
your own resources or does Nacogdoches have a library which is helpful in your
research? The university library there, I have two very good friends who work
there. i don't get into natchez too terribly often it's a 60 mile round trip i
do get in once a week to wash and get groceries and that sort of thing but
usually i have a shuck lit you know and have to get get all this done before it
goes out but i these two friends uh when i have something that i really need
they will look it up they'll either either uh photocopy it or uh check it out
for me and that's really a help, because then I can pop by one of their houses
and not have to park and walk. At our university, the parking problem is
something, and you have to walk about a mile to get where you're going, and the
old knees are just not real good at that anymore. But, I have a tremendous
library myself, and I keep adding to it all the time. I don't think a tornado
could blow my house away. it's so heavy with books. So, really, ordinarily, I
can find almost anything I want there. Now, this DNA project, I have a friend in
Houston who is a science fiction writer. Her husband is an engineer at NASA and,
of course, they have access to tremendous technical libraries and she's Xeroxed
to me a great deal of stuff on the recombinant DNA did you realize something as
far as we can find there has been no work done on the subcellular phenomena that
take place when a plant goes dormant there's any amount of stuff on what it
looks like know, what the plant does, but what do the mitochondria do, what, you
know, what happens to the cytoplasm. What differences are there on the sub
-molecular level when a plant goes dormant? And we can't find anything. There
may be something, but I have not been able to find it. My friend at SFA Library
checked out a stack of books, half as long as I am, and there was nothing in
there. And then the lady down in Houston couldn't find anything there either, so
very interesting. So you stumbled across things like that? Yeah. Research, too.
Yeah, a lot of things. Do you wish you started writing? I started, let's say,
writing towards being published at an earlier age. You know, I have given that a
lot of thought. It's a very rough row to hoe. But I have come to the conclusion
that people who have a great deal of success, very young, quite often don't keep
pushing themselves to refine their technique, get better and better and better,
so that, by golly, you are so good they can't turn you down. You know, this is
really a good head of steam to have behind you. Okay, I've been rejected for 20
years. I'm not going to quit. I'm going to get so good. There's no way they can
keep turning me down. And besides which, you know, when you live 40 years, you
know a lot of things you didn't know when you live 25 years. you understand not
only what people do but how they feel under different circumstances when a
husband comes home and has lost his job you not only know how he acts you know
how he and his wife feel about it and this is something that i think causes a
great deal of modern non-genre fiction to be superficial people are writing
about it who have never stood in those shoes and who don't really understand
what it does to your guts to have a child get deathly ill at two o'clock in the
morning, you know, all this sort of thing. To have a husband almost killed by a
tractor, which I did 30 miles out in the country with the wounds so close to the
artery that you could see the artery pulsing and you had to get him in the truck
and get him to the hospital and not panic. Oh and be so proud of my sons who
were something like 15 and 17, I guess, at the time. Never turned to hair steady
as rocks, got the cot mattress in the van, got their daddy in the van while I
was calling the hospital. Got him in there and got him up there, and nobody
quivered. We waited through all the surgery and everything. Got home that night,
and you talk about three people sitting and shaking for about three hours. But
while the chips were down, it was really a neat thing. But now, this is
something that you haven't lived through when you're 25 years old or even 30
-something years. And the longer you live, the more you have to write about.
You've got to live it to write it. You've got to live it to write it. You sure
have. Okay. Any other questions? You read all my questions. I didn't need to say
a thing. We really appreciate it. Oh, I've enjoyed it. As you can doubtless
tell, I love to talk. We love to listen. Most of my ancestors are Irish. Don't
do it yet, David. It's Mayhar, right? Mayhar. Art of Mayhar. Mayhar. Okay, I
want to tell myself that because I'll call it May-er if I don't.